https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/892556

## Abstract
We report on the spectra of the long-range attractive molecular states of the Cs$_2$ dimer which below the dissociation limits $6s + 6p_{1/2}$ and $6s + 6p_{3/2}$ which are accessible by molecular photoassociation of cold Cs atoms. For the states $0_u^+$ and $0_g^-(6s + 6p_{3/2})$, we have performed trap-loss measurements, which are in good agreement with the theoretical calculations, performed in a perturbative approach. For the $0_g^-$ and $1_u$ ($6s + 6p_{3/2}$) states, we observe, after spontaneous decay of the electronically excited molecules, the formation of translationally cold molecules. A rate of formation of cold molecules of the order of $\sim 10^5$ molecules per second is obtained in the case of the state $0_g^-$.

Index Terms—Cold collisions, cold molecules, laser cooling, long-range interaction, molecular photoassociation.

## I. INTRODUCTION

Molecular photoassociation (PA) of cold atoms is a promising way for obtaining gas samples of cold molecules [1]. The formation of cold molecules is the result of the absorption of one photon by two colliding cold atoms to create an excited cold molecule, which spontaneously radiates toward the molecular states correlated with ground-state atoms. In such experiments, it is difficult to estimate the actual efficiency of the different processes. Cold collisions are very sensitive to the experimental conditions, and the resonance enhanced multi-photon ionization (REMPI) process used for the detection of cold molecules in states correlated with ground-state atoms is not well known. We have performed precise measurements of the photoassociation rates in well-controlled experimental conditions. We compare them to the rates calculated in a perturbative approach. The number of cold molecules is deduced from the experimental PA rates by using the calculated branching ratio of spontaneous emission toward the molecular states correlating with ground-state atoms. We compare the number obtained with the number of detected molecular ions.

### A. Photoassociation Process

The reason for interest in the molecular PA process with cold atoms has been pointed out in the early times of laser cooling developments [2]. During a PA transition, a pair of ground-state atoms absorbs a photon detuned to the red from an atomic resonance to populate an excited attractive electronic state of the corresponding dimer. When cold atoms are involved, this process produces an electronically excited molecule in a well-defined ro-vibrational level. The PA process has many implications in molecular spectroscopy [3]. The resolution of the PA spectroscopy is limited by the width of the statistical distribution of the relative colliding kinetic energy, which is of the order of $k_B T$ ($k_B$ is the Boltzmann constant and $T$ the temperature of the atomic sample), that is about 2 MHz at $T \approx 100$ $\mu$K. Taking into account the natural width of the resonance line and the spectral width of the PA laser, a resolution better than 10 MHz can be reached. In the dilute medium of cold atoms, PA is efficient mainly at a long-range interatomic distance $R$, since the probability to find two atoms at a distance $R$ varies as $R^2$; PA of cold atoms is therefore particularly well adapted to studying long-range molecular states. For homonuclear alkali dimers, the molecular potential curves correlated to the first excited dissociation limit $s + p$ present an asymptotic behavior in $R^{-3}$ resulting from the electrostatic dipole–dipole long-range interaction. It is thus possible to populate efficiently by PA (see Fig. 1) vibrational levels presenting very large elongation, up to a few hundred atomic units (1 a.u.= $a_0 = 0.052\,917\,72$ nm). The situation would be different for the mixed alkali dimers [4]; in this case, a shorter range van der Waals asymptotic interaction, varying as $R^{-6}$ (as for the ground-state alkali molecular potentials), prevents a mixed pair of cold atoms from efficient PA. Up to now, PA has been demonstrated for alkali atoms from Li to Cs [5]–[8], [1], and more recently for the hydrogen atom [9] and for He* [10]. Preliminary results for NaCs have also been reported [11]. The principle of PA experiments is the same for all the alkali atoms. We present here the case of the cesium atom which, as we will see, is particularly favorable for the formation of cold molecules.

The excited photoassociated molecules are translationally cold (neglecting the recoil energy, they are at the same temperature than as atoms), and spontaneous emission leads back mostly to dissociation into two free atoms (Fig. 1), with a relative kinetic energy larger than in the initial state. Thus, the pair of atoms generally escapes from the atomic trap, and the analysis of the trap losses is a convenient way to detect PA. Trap-loss PA experiments with cold cesium atoms have permitted the spectroscopy of the three attractive Hund’s $c$ case states $1_g$, $0_u^+$, and $0_g^-$, below the $6s + 6p_{3/2}$ dissociation limit [12]. In this paper, we report also for the first time on trap-loss experiments corresponding to PA spectroscopy of the cesium attractive states $1_g$, $0_u^+$ and $0_g^-$, below the dissociation limit $6s + 6p_{1/2}$ (see Fig. 2). For several particular cases, we have performed accurate measurements of PA rates and one aim of this article is to compare them to PA rates calculated within a perturbative theory of PA.

### B. Formation of Cold Molecules

Laser cooling of molecules is known to be a very difficult problem due to the lack of a closed two-level scheme for recycling the population [13]. An alternative way for obtaining long-lived cold molecules is to start from a cold and dense atomic sample. Deexcitation of excited molecules created by the PA process appears, therefore, as an obvious way to form cold ground-state molecules, at least when the probability of spontaneous decay into bound levels is not negligible [14]. Molecular photoassociation of cold cesium atoms has already allowed the formation of translationally cold ground-state (triplet or singlet) Cs$_2$ molecules, after PA of the $0_g^-$ and $1_u$ ($6s + 6p_{3/2}$) states [1], [15], [16]. In these experiments, a crude estimation of the formation rate yields $10^6$ molecules per second. The formation of cold molecules through PA has also been demonstrated for the state $A^1\Sigma_u^+(4s + 4p_{3/2})$ of the potassium dimer, with a relatively low formation rate of $10^3$ molecules per second [17]. More efficient production has more recently been achieved by utilizing a two-step excitation scheme. In this latter case, highly excited molecules radiate to various vibrational levels of the $X$ ground-state, with a rate of $10^5$ $K_2$ molecules per second and per vibrational level [18]. The origin of the efficient Cs$_2$ cold molecule formation process is related to the existence of a double-well shape for the $0_g^-$, and $1_u$ molecular potential curves (Fig. 2). PA populates the ro-vibrational levels of the outer well of the $0_g^-$ and $1_u$ states. These very special molecules are called long-range molecules [19]; their cohesion is mainly due to the multipole electrostatic interaction. In the $1_u$ case, for instance, the exchange molecular terms are negligible [16]. The corresponding ro-vibrational levels present a classical turning point (a Condon point) at intermediate distance (15 and 25 $a_0$, respectively), where, according to the Franck–Condon principle, bound-bound transitions toward ground-state levels are more favorable. The translationally cold molecules in states correlated with ground-state atoms are probed through their photoionization into Cs$_2^+$ ions, which are collected through a time-of-flight mass spectrometer. The ballistic expansion of the cold molecular cloud reveals a temperature close to the temperature of the initial cold atomic sample, which can be as low as 20 $\mu$K. Another aim of this paper is to give an estimate of the rate of formation of cold molecules, in order to examine the possibilities offered by the PA process to obtain in the near future a dense and cold molecular sample in a given ro-vibrational level of the ground state.

The paper is organized as follows. Sections II and III are devoted to the description of the experimental setup and to the analysis of the obtained PA trap-loss spectra. We have focused our effort on accurate measurements of the PA process rates. In Section IV, we recall PA theory, and we calculate the PA rates, which are compared to the experimental ones. We then give a theoretical prediction for the number of formed cold molecules in the case of PA excitation of the $0_g^-$ and $1_u$ states. In Section V, we deduce from the number of detected Cs$_2^+$ ions an estimate for the rate of formation of cold molecules. In Section VI, this rate is compared to the theoretically predicted one. Finally, in Section VII, we briefly investigate perspectives in the research feild of cold molecules.


## II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

PA experiments with alkali cold atoms are performed by using the usual tools providing cold atomic samples: magneto-optical trap (MOT) [20], [21], the dark spontaneous force optical trap (SPOT) [22], [23], or the dipole trap such as far off resonance trap (FORT) [6]. In the cesium experiments, the cold atom source is provided by the use of either a Cs vapor loaded MOT or a dark SPOT. Details of the experimental setup have been published in several previous articles [1], [12], [15]. In the present paper, we consider PA experiments using a MOT, for which we performed a careful determination of the experimental parameters, such as the total number of atoms $N_{at}$, the atomic density $n_{at}$, and the temperature $T$. A scheme of the setup is reported in Fig. 3. PA is achieved by continuously illuminating the cold Cs atoms with the beam ($\lambda_{PA} \approx 852 \, \text{nm}$ or 894 nm) of a Ti:Sapphire laser pumped by an Argon ion laser, red-detuned from the $6s(f = 4) \rightarrow 6p_{3/2}(f' = 5)$ atomic transition (11 732.183 cm$^{-1}$ [24]), or from the $6s(f = 4) \rightarrow 6p_{1/2}(f' = 3)$ atomic transition (11 178.07 cm$^{-1}$). The population of the ro-vibrational level of a long-range molecular state $\Omega_{u,g}$—quoted here in Hund’s c case notation—is achieved according to

$$2Cs(6s, f = 4) + h\nu_1 \rightarrow Cs_2(\Omega_{u,g}(6s + 6p_{1/2}, 3/2; v, J)). \tag{1}$$

The frequency scale is calibrated by using a Fabry Perot interferometer and the absorption lines of iodine [25]. The maximum available power of the laser beam is 650 mW. We approximate the laser intensity by a Gaussian profile $\exp(-2\rho^2/w_0^2)$, with $w_0 = 300 \pm 50 \, \mu m$ corresponding to a maximum intensity of 460 W·cm$^{-2}$.

We used two kinds of detection of the photoassociation process. First, we measured the fluorescence yield from the trap, collected by a photodiode; this yield shows variations due to the trap losses induced by the formation and dissociation of PA molecules. Second, Cs$_2$ ions are detected through a time of flight mass spectrometer, after photoionization of the translationally cold Cs$_2$ molecules. The photons are provided by a pulsed dye laser ($\lambda_2 \sim 716 \, nm$, 7-ns duration) pumped by the second harmonic of a Nd–YAG laser; the ionization is a REMPI process, using as the intermediate step the vibrational levels of an electronic molecular state correlated to the $6s + 5d_{3/2}, 5/2$ dissociation limits [1], [26]. There is a window of a few hundred wavenumbers around the wavelength $\lambda_I \sim 716 \, nm$ and another window is observed for $\lambda'_I \sim 554 \, nm$, corresponding to the REMPI process via vibrational levels correlated to $6s + 7s$. The sensitivity of ion detection for probing the formation of molecules is a key point of these experiments.

The total number of cold atoms inside the trap is determined by using a calibrated photodiode to record the fluorescence signal due to the trapping laser. We use the expression for the detected power of fluorescence in the solid angle $\Omega$, given by

$$P = N_{at} \frac{\Omega}{4\pi} h\nu_{\text{trap}} \frac{\Gamma}{2} \frac{C_1^2 \omega_{\text{tot}}^2 / 2}{\delta^2 + \Gamma^2 / 4 + C_2^2 \omega_{\text{tot}}^2 / 2}.\tag{2}$$

In (2), $\omega_{\text{tot}}$ is the total Rabi frequency due to the six trapping laser beams at the frequency $\nu_{\text{trap}}$, $\Gamma$ is the inverse of the characteristic time of spontaneous emission. $C_1$ and $C_2$ correspond to effective coefficients, $C_1^2 \simeq C_2^2 \simeq 0.73$, experimentally measured in [27]. These coefficients do not correspond to those expected ($\simeq 0.4$) by assuming an equipartition on all the Zeeman sub-levels of the atomic ground state $f = 4$. They indicate a larger population in the magnetic sublevels with maximum absolute quantum numbers. Depending on the experimental conditions (laser detuning and intensity), the number of atoms lies in the range between 2 and 5 $\times 10^7$ and the temperature $T$ of the cold atomic sample ranges is 20–150 $\mu K$ [28]. For a detuning of 14 MHz, an intensity of $\sim 1 \, \text{mW/cm}^2$ for each laser beam, and a temperature of $140 \pm 20 \, \mu K$, we get a number $N_{at}$ of $4.7 \times 10^7$ atoms, estimated within a factor of 2. The atomic sample is approximately spherical. We assume that the density corresponds to a Gaussian distribution: $\exp(-\sigma^2 / 2\sigma_R^2)$, with $\sigma_R = 300 \pm 50 \, \mu m$ in the three spatial dimensions. The mean density is of the order of $4 \times 10^{10} \, \text{atoms/cm}^3$ ($\sim 10^{11} \, \text{atoms/cm}^3$ for the peak density) and is known within a factor of 3. For these experimental conditions, the characteristic loading time for the trap has been measured to be in the range 600–800 ms, depending on day-to-day fluctuations of the experimental conditions.

## III. EXPERIMENTAL PHOTOASSOCIATION RATE

The trap-loss spectrum for detunings in the $2-45^{-1}$ cm range below the $6s + 6p_{3/2}$ dissociation limit has already been presented elsewhere [12], and interpreted as ro-vibrational progressions of the attractive potential states $1g, 0_u^+$ and $0_g^-$ correlated to the $6s + 6p_{3/2}$ limit. In Fig. 4, typical trap-loss spectra obtained more recently for detunings in the range of 0.5–15 cm$^{-1}$ below the dissociation limit $6s + 6p_{1/2}$ by using a MOT atomic sample are shown. Vibrational progressions corresponding to the $1g, 0_u^+$ and $0_g^-$ attractive states are identified by their calculated width due to the hyperfine structure: 3 GHz, 200 MHz, and 200 MHz, respectively. The energies of the $0_g^-$ lines have been fitted using the semiclassical LeRoy-Bernstein law [29], which confirms, as expected theoretically, that the leading term in the multipolar expansion of the $0_g^-$ state is $C_6^{\text{eff}}$, i.e., that $C_3^{\text{eff}} = 0$. The experimental value is $C_6^{\text{eff}} = -99\,900 \pm 6300 \, \text{a.u.}$, in good agreement with the theoretical value given by

$$C_6^{\text{eff}} = \frac{1}{3}C_6^\Sigma + \frac{2}{3}C_6^\Pi - \frac{4}{3}(C_3)^2/\hbar^2 A_{SO} = -94\,480 \, \text{a.u.} \tag{3}$$

where $C_6^\Sigma$ and $C_6^\Pi$ are taken from [30], and $(2/3)\hbar^2 A_{SO} = \Delta E_{SO} = 554.11 \, \text{cm}^{-1}$ is the cesium spin-orbit constant. It is interesting to notice that the observation of the $0_g^-$ ($6s + 6p_{1/2}$) vibrational progression demonstrates that PA still occurs at a rather short-range distance of 35–60 $a_0$. We notice that for the states with a $C_3$ long-range behavior, we observed PA trap losses at a distance of 50–150 $a_0$. The $1_g$ and $0^+_u$ ($6s + 6p_{1/2}$) progressions can hardly be fitted within the Leroy–Bernstein approach, due to internal radial couplings with upper electronic states of the same symmetry. The analysis of these data within the quantum defect theory framework is presently in progress.

For both spectra in Fig. 4 of the present paper, and in [12, Fig. 3] (see also Fig. 8 of the Section V), we observe significant trap loss reaching typically 10% and more, in the 10–15 cm$^{-1}$ detuning range. One also notices a modulation of the line intensities. As we will discuss in the next section, the experimental intensities of the spectral lines depend on several factors [31]; the modulation is essentially linked to the variations of the Franck–Condon (FC) factors of the transition between the initial state and the final ro-vibrational level of the final state. For vibrational levels with large $v$ (i.e., close to the dissociation limit), the FC factors can be considered as proportional to the value of the initial continuum radial wavefunction $\Psi(R)$, at the classical outer turning point $R_0$ of the excited ro-vibrational wavefunction. The intensity of the PA resonance lines is then proportional to $|\Psi(R_0(v))|^2$. One understands in this simple description the existence of minima in the spectrum, which reflect the nodes of the radial wavefunction $\Psi(R)$ at the position $R_0$ [32], [33]. The trap-loss measurements have been performed avoiding these intensity minima.

We have performed accurate trap-loss measurements for the two states $0^+_u$ and $0^-_g$ ($6s + 6p_{3/2}$), under the MOT experimental conditions described in the previous paragraph, for different PA laser intensities and for two vibrational levels, the $v = 77$, $J = 2$ ro-vibrational level of the $0^-_g$ state, located $-6.92$ cm$^{-1}$ below the $6s(f = 4) + 6p_{3/2}(f' = 5)$ limit and the level corresponding to a resonance line of the state $0^+_u$ located at $-14.35$ cm$^{-1}$ below the same dissociation limit. The reasons for this choice are: 1) the $0^+_u$ state exhibits very large trap losses and narrow line widths ($\sim 1.5$ GHz) and 2) the state $0^-_g$ is rotationally resolved[^1] and leads to the formation of cold molecules. Fig. 5(a) shows measured trap-loss versus PA laser power for the two considered levels. For the $0^-_g$ state, saturation starts at about 100 mW laser power and becomes complete for 300 mW, with a maximum trap loss equal to $\sim 25\%$. We do not observe a similar behavior for the state $0^+_u$. The origin of the saturation will be discussed and tentatively explained in the conclusion. Comparison with theoretical rates is made for two trap-loss measurements, for the $0^+_u$ state with a laser power of 285 mW, which corresponds to an intensity of 200 W·cm$^{-2}$, and for the state $0^-_g$ with a laser power of 80 mW, which corresponds to an intensity of 55 W·cm$^{-2}$.

To determine the experimental PA rates, we have considered the dynamic trap-equation [34] expressing the balance between the loading rate $L$ and the various loss rates, for a total number of trapped atoms $N_{at}$ and a density $n_{at}$

$$
\frac{dN_{at}}{dt} = L - \gamma N_{at} - (\beta + \beta_{\text{PA}}) \int_{\text{vol}} n_{at}^2(r) \, d^3r \tag{4}
$$

where
$\gamma$: loss rate due to background gas collisions;
$\beta$: loss rate due to binary collisions among the trapped atoms;
$\beta_{\text{PA}}$: loss rate resulting from PA among the trapped atoms.

The parameter $\beta_{\text{PA}}$ is actually weighted by a factor $w_0^2/(w_0^2 + 2\sigma_R^2)$ due to the partial overlap between the cold atomic volume and the laser beam [see Fig. 3(c)]. For the above resonance line at $-1435 \, \text{cm}^{-1}$, the rate $\beta_{\text{PA}}(0^+_u)$ is estimated following two experimental procedures (see Fig. 8 and [12]).

In the *steady-state regime*, we have measured the total number of trapped atoms, with or without the PA laser. In the former case, we record the resonance line intensity for the considered ro-vibrational level. Considering the Gaussian distribution of the atomic density and assuming that it is not too affected by PA, we determine the ratio

$$
\frac{N_{\text{PA}}}{N_{at}} \approx \frac{\gamma + \beta n_{at}}{\gamma + (\beta + \beta_{\text{PA}}) n_{at}} \tag{5}
$$

Knowing the quantity $\gamma + \beta n_{at}$, we are able to determine the parameter $\beta_{\text{PA}}$. The latter quantity corresponds to the inverse of the characteristic loading time of the MOT, which has been measured to $\tau = 735 \, \text{ms}$ [see Fig. 5(b)]. We obtain in this way

$$
n_{at}\beta_{\text{PA}}(0^+_u, 200 \, \text{W} \cdot \text{cm}^{-2}) = 3.5 \pm 0.5 \, \text{s}^{-1}.
$$

We have also considered a dynamic procedure 2), where the PA laser is applied at a given time. The steady state is reached within a time

$$
\tau' = (\tau^{-1} + \tau_{\text{PA}}^{-1})^{-1} \tag{6}
$$

approximately equal to 585 ms. The determination of the parameter $\tau_{\text{PA}}^{-1} = n_{at}/\beta_{\text{PA}}$ leads then to the value $n_{at}/\beta_{\text{PA}}(0^+_u, 200 \, \text{W} \cdot \text{cm}^{-2}) = 3.0 \pm 1 \, \text{s}^{-1}$, in agreement with the previous one. The larger error bar is due to the difficulty in precisely determining the transient time of the PA process.

We have also measured the rate $n_{at}/\beta_{\text{PA}}(0^-_g, 55 \, \text{W} \cdot \text{cm}^{-2}) = 2.45 \pm 0.6 \, \text{s}^{-1}$ for the $v = 77$, $J = 2$ level by using the above-defined procedure 1). More generally, in our experiments, for all the states observed in the energy range 5–10 cm$^{-1}$ below both the dissociation limits, $6s + 6p_{3/2}$ and $6s + 6p_{1/2}$, PA rates measured through trap losses have values ranging roughly between 1 and 5 s$^{-1}$.

## IV. THEORETICAL PHOTOASSOCIATION RATE

The perturbative approach adapted to the weak laser-field regime, developed in [31], is fully adapted to the calculation of PA rates of Cs$_2$ molecules, as long as the saturation regime is not reached. Starting from a continuum state $\alpha$ with energy $E$ of a lower electronic state $g$, the PA laser with wavelength $\lambda_{\text{PA}}$ and intensity $I$ populates a vibrational level $v$ of an excited electronic state $e$. Only resonant continuum states with energy $E = E(v) - hc / \lambda_{\text{PA}}$ are considered. We will assume $E = k_B T$ in the following. Centrifugal distortion is neglected here, and both states correspond to the s-wave condition ($\ell = 0$) reached at low temperatures. The $R$-variation of the electronic transition dipole moment is ignored as PA is expected to occur most often at large distances ($R \geq 40 \, a_0$). The PA rate $R_{\text{PA}}$ per atom (in s$^{-1}$) is defined according to

$$
R_{\text{PA}} = A(g, e, \vec{\epsilon}_{\text{PA}}) \left( \frac{3}{2\pi} \right)^{3/2} \frac{h}{2} n_{at} \lambda_{th}^3
$$

$$
\times \exp(-E_r / k_B T) K^2 S^2 (\alpha, v) \tag{7}
$$

where

- $A(g, e, \vec{\epsilon}_{\text{PA}})$: angular factor depending on the initial state $g$, on the final state $e$, and on the laser polarization $\vec{c}_{\text{PA}}$;
- $\lambda_{th} = h \sqrt{\left(\frac{1}{3} \mu k_B T\right)}$: thermal de Broglie wavelength (with $\mu$ the reduced mass of the system);
- $2K$: atomic Rabi frequency deduced from

$$
K^2 = \frac{\Gamma}{8} \frac{I}{I_0}. \tag{8}
$$
>[!NOTE] This is a typo. It should be $K^2 = \frac{\Gamma^2}{8} \frac{I}{I_0}$

The saturation intensity $I_0 = (\pi h c \Gamma / 3 \lambda_{\text{PA}}^3)$ (where $\Gamma / 2\pi = 5.22 \, \text{MHz}$ is the natural width of the atomic $6p$ level) has a value $1.1 \, \text{mW/cm}^2$ at the PA laser wavelength $\lambda_{\text{PA}}$. Following our previous work [31], the PA rate $R_{\text{PA}}$ depends mainly on the overlap integral $S(\alpha, v) = \langle \alpha | v \rangle$ between the (energy-normalized) radial wavefunction of the initial continuum state $\alpha$, and the bound wavefunction of the final vibrational level $v$. Equation (7), divided by $n_{at}$ and by the incident photon flux $\phi = I / n_{\text{PA}}$, yields a rate $\kappa$ per photon and per unit density (its dimension is a length to the fifth power), which is similar to the expressions given by other authors [2], [35]–[37]. All useful parameters are determined according to the experimental conditions $n_{at} = 10^{11} \, \text{cm}^{-3}$, $I = 55 \, \text{W/cm}^2$, $T = 140 \, \mu\text{K}$ described in Section III. Table I shows the values of the angular factor. We have chosen an initial state corresponding to atoms in a given hyperfine level, either $f = 3$ or $f = 4$, the state of the atom pairs being a statistical mixing with equal weights of all possible $F_t, M_F$ values of the angular momentum of the atom pair. The final state is either a $0_g^-$ state or a $0_u^+$ state and of a linear laser polarization. The calculation involves straightforward angular momentum algebra; we just mention that pure Hund’s $c$ states, either $(6s + 6p_{3/2})$ or $(6s + 6p_{1/2})$, have been used and that the table displays the sums over rotational quantum numbers $J$ and $M_J$. As homonuclear molecules are considered, fully symmetrical wave functions have been used. The ratio between the different $J$ components of the rotational structures of the lines depends on the fine-structure mixing between $(6s + 6p_{3/2})$ and $(6s + 6p_{1/2})$ states and cannot be precisely reproduced without a more complete calculation.

We display in Fig. 6 the quantities $R_{\text{PA}}$ and $\kappa$ as a function of detuning for the double-well state $0_g^-(6s + 6p_{3/2})$, and for the long-range attractive states $0_g^-(6s + 6p_{1/2})$ and $0_u^+(6s + 6p_{1/2}, 3/2)$, over all the detuning range covered by the $0_g^-(6s + 6p_{3/2})$ external well. Except in the angular factor, which is taken for the case of atoms initially in the $f = 4$ hyperfine ground state and for $\ell = 0$ (see Table I), hyperfine structure is ignored and these states are assumed to be populated, respectively, from the continuum of the $a^3\Sigma_u^+ (6s+6s)$ and $X^1\Sigma_g^+ (6s+6s)$ states. Our estimations are performed using potential curves deduced from quantum chemistry [38] and asymptotic [30], [39] calculations, except for the $0_g^- (6s + 6p_{3/2})$ state, described by the Rydberg Klein Rees (RKR) potential curve obtained from experimental spectra in [12]. The repulsive wall of the $a^3\Sigma_u^+ (6s + 6s)$ and $X^1\Sigma_g^+ (6s + 6s)$ curves have been further modified, in order to reproduce the experimental $C_6$ coefficient and scattering length [32]. 

As expected [31], the PA efficiency is similar for the three states $0_g^- (6s + 6p_{3/2}), 0_u^+ (6s + 6p_{3/2})$ and $0_u^+ (6s + 6p_{1/2})$, apart from the slow dependence on the long-range behavior of the states varying as $(C_3)^{2/3}$, where $C_3$ is the corresponding leading long-range coefficient]. In contrast, the decrease with the detuning $\delta$ is much faster, compatible with the approximate predicted $(\delta)^{-7/6}$ behavior, given in [31].

Precise comparison between experiment and theory can be made for the two vibrational levels of the two states $0_u^+$ and $0_g^- (6s + 6p_{3/2})$, for which precise atomic loss rates have been measured. The main source of uncertainty lies in the experimental parameters (atomic density and temperature, laser intensity) which have to be introduced in the calculation. For the $0_g^-$ and $0_u^+$ states, respectively, we obtain theoretical values of 6.6 and 5.8 mol·s$^{-1}$, to be compared to experimental values of 2.4 and 3.5 mol·s$^{-1}$ (assuming simply that the atom loss rate is twice the PA rate). Calculated rates and experimental rates are quite generally in good agreement, both lying within the 1–5-s$^{-1}$ range. We notice that the PA rates of the $0_g^- (6s + 6p_{1/2})$ state are not negligible, despite the $C_6$ long-range behavior. The latter result is of some interest for PA of heteronuclear species, which also present a $C_6$ long-range behavior. Finally, we notice that we do not see any trap loss when the expected PA rate becomes smaller than 0.5 mol·s$^{-1}$, which corresponds to a 1% decrease in the number of atoms.


## V. EXPERIMENTAL NUMBER OF COLD MOLECULES

In the energy range 5–15 cm$^{-1}$ below $6s + 6p_{3/2}$ (see Fig. 8), three vibrational progressions assigned to the long range $1_g, 0_u^+$, and $0_g^- (6s + 6p_{3/2})$ states are visible in the fluorescence spectrum. However, only the vibrational progressions of the $0_g^-$ and $1_u$ states are present in the Cs$_2^+$ ion spectrum. The detection is sensitive to detunings of up to 80 cm$^{-1}$ and 7 cm$^{-1}$ for the $0_g^-$ and $1_u$ states, respectively, corresponding to the depths of their outer potential wells. By applying the PA laser during a temporal sequence of 15 ms and by delaying the ionizing laser pulse compared to the switch off of the PA laser, we observe that the Cs$_2^+$ ion signal decreases with a characteristic time of the order of 10 ms. This duration is five orders of magnitude larger than the radiative lifetime of the excited photoassociated molecules. This result indicates that ions are not produced by photoionization of PA excited molecules, but of stable molecules. It provides proof of the formation of cold Cs$_2$ molecules in either the $X^1\Sigma_g^+$ ground state or in the $a^3\Sigma_u^+$ metastable state.

The cold Cs$_2$ molecules are insensitive to the trapping lasers; they fall down from the trap and are detected by photoionization a few millimeters below the trapping zone [1], [12]. Fig. 7 depicts an example of a spatial analysis of the ballistic expansion of the falling molecular cloud, which yields a measure of the temperature of the molecules. A model based on [40], taking into account the formation and the fall of the cold molecules, allows one to determine the molecular temperature, which has been found to be as low as $20^{+15}_{-5} \, \mu K$, and which shows no significant difference with the atomic temperature.

As already mentioned, the efficiency of the formation of cold molecules comes from the existence of a Condon point at intermediate distance in the excited potential curve. PA happens at long-range distances. While spontaneous emission at a long-range distance (see Fig. 2, case (i) leads always to dissociation of the excited molecules, cold ground or metastable state molecules can be formed, if spontaneous emission occurs at a short enough interatomic distance (see Fig. 2, cases (ii) or (iii)). The $1g$ or $0_u^+$ states correspond to case (i). Conversely, for the $0_g^-$ or $1_u$ states, the molecule oscillates between long-range and intermediate distances and the formation of stable cold molecules is possible. Typically up to 500 ions per shot are detected. Taking into account the efficiency of the different steps of the detection procedure, we will give an estimate for the number $N_{cold}$ of cold ground or metastable state molecules present in the MOT zone.

The number $N_{\text{ions}}$ of Cs$_2^+$ ions detected in the experiments is, indeed, proportional to the number of cold molecules; one can write

$$
N_{\text{ions}} = \eta_{\text{ion}} N_{\text{cold}} \tag{9}
$$

where $\eta_{\text{ion}}$ includes the microchannel plate efficiency, which is about 30%, and the ion recollection rate, which is about 90%. The efficiency of the ionization process, including both excitation to the intermediate state (levels of the excited molecular states at the $(6s + 5d)$ limit, e.g., $2^3\Pi_g$) and the ionization itself, is difficult to estimate. It is mainly controlled by the FC factors between the $v''$ vibrational wave-functions with the wave-functions of the vibrational levels $v_{\text{win}}$ which are reached in the "FC window" during the first ionization step. According to the width of the windows explored in the experiment (at 13 900 cm$^{-1}$ and 14 600 cm$^{-1}$ for the $X^1\Sigma_g^+$ and $a^3\Sigma_u^+$ ionization, respectively), levels of the excited molecular states at the $(6s + 5d)$ limit, e.g., $2^3\Pi_g$, are thought to serve as an intermediate step. Indeed, following again the potential curve calculations of [38], these states exhibit potential wells of the same order as the windows above, and are located within the right range of ionization laser wavelength. Obviously, such FC factors vary a lot according to the specific $v''$ levels and laser wavelength $\lambda_2$. However, we have obtained the largest values for the FC factors in a window of about 700 cm$^{-1}$ width, centered at 14 000 cm$^{-1}$. The ion signal is linear versus the ionization laser power and the saturation is not observed for our available laser intensities (varying with a factor five). A rough estimate of the ionization efficiency is a few percent, less than 10%. We obtain for the $\eta_{\text{ion}}$ parameter a value smaller than 2.5%. For 500 ions detected per shot, we estimate to have more than 20 000 cold ground-state molecules in the trapping zone. The cold molecules stay in the trap zone for a characteristic time of 10 ms. One can thus infer a rate of cold-molecule formation of more than two million per second. We will see that this number is compatible with the perturbative approach.

## VI. CALCULATIONS OF THE COLD MOLECULE FORMATION RATE

The approximations made in the PA theory described in this section are: 1) the weak field limit, valid if the PA rate is much smaller than the relaxation term due to the spontaneous emission; 2) the steady-state approximation, valid if the vibrational period is much shorter than the characteristic time of spontaneous emission; and 3) the thermal equilibrium regime, assuming that thermal equilibrium is reached in a time much shorter than the inverse of the PA rate. Under these assumptions, the rate equation for the number $N_{\text{exc}}(v, J)$ (or simply $N_{\text{exc}}$) of molecules photoassociated in a ro-vibrational state ($v, J$) by a laser with an intensity $I$ in the trap at temperature $T$ containing $N_{at}$ atoms with density $n_{at}$, can be written as

$$
\frac{d}{dt} N_{\text{exc}} = R_{\text{PA}} N_{at} - \Gamma_{\text{exc}} N_{\text{exc}} \tag{10}
$$

where $R_{\text{PA}}$ is the photoabsorption rate per atom (in s$^{-1}$), $\Gamma_{\text{exc}}$ the spontaneous emission probability of the level $v$, and $N_{at}$ the number of atoms in the trap at time $t$. Provided that $R_{\text{PA}} \ll \Gamma_{\text{exc}} \sim \Gamma$, the number of atoms $N_{at}$ is assumed to be constant, as the trap loading time is larger ($\sim 700 \, \text{ms}$) than all other time constants of the problem. Provided that $R_{\text{PA}} \ll \Gamma_{\text{exc}} \sim \Gamma$, the system reaches within a time $\Gamma_{\text{exc}}^{-1}$ a stationary state with a constant number $\bar{N}_{\text{exc}}$ of excited molecules

$$
\bar{N}_{\text{exc}} = \frac{R_{\text{PA}}}{\Gamma_{\text{exc}}} N_{at}(0). \tag{11}
$$

The number of long-lived ultracold molecules $N_{\text{cold}}(t)$ produced at time $t$ by spontaneous emission in the molecular ground and metastable states can be estimated from another rate equation

$$
\frac{d}{dt} N_{\text{cold}} = \Gamma_{\text{exc}}^{\text{bound}} N_{\text{exc}} - \gamma N_{\text{cold}} \tag{12}
$$

where $\Gamma_{\text{exc}}^{\text{bound}}$ is the spontaneous emission probability of the excited level $v$ toward all levels of the molecular ground and metastable states, and $\gamma$ the loss rate of ultracold molecules (mainly due to gravity or to collisional processes). After integration, assuming that the stationary regime is reached for the photoassociation, one gets the number of ultracold molecules

$$
N_{\text{cold}} = \frac{\Gamma_{\text{exc}}^{\text{bound}}}{\gamma} \bar{N}_{\text{exc}}(1 - e^{-\gamma t}) \tag{13}
$$

which can be written, according to (11), as

$$
N_{\text{cold}} = \frac{\Gamma_{\text{exc}}^{\text{bound}} R_{\text{PA}}}{\gamma} \frac{N_0(1 - e^{-\gamma t})}{\Gamma_{\text{exc}}}. \tag{14}
$$

Neglecting the $R$ dependence of the transition dipole moment, the ratio between bound–bound and total spontaneous emission probabilities in (14) can be approximated by

$$
\frac{\Gamma_{\text{exc}}^{\text{bound}}}{\Gamma_{\text{exc}}} = \sum_{v''} \langle v'' | v \rangle = S(v \to g) \tag{15}
$$

where the sum is performed over all bound vibrational levels $v''$ of the molecular ground or metastable state $g$. Selection rules for the PA rate are the same as for the spontaneous emission. We present in Fig. 9 the $S(v \to g)$ sums for the transitions

$$
0_g^-(6s + 6p_{3/2}) \to a^3 \sum_u^+
$$

over detunings covering the energy range of the $0_g^-$ external well. As expected, their variation is opposite to the variation of the PA rate. For comparison, we have also reported the bound-bound branching ratios for the state $0_g^-(6s + 6p_{1/2})$. The lowest levels of the $0_g^-(6s + 6p_{3/2})$ long-range well decay almost completely into bound levels. In contrast, the weakness of $S(0_g^-(6s + 6p_{1/2})) \to a^3 \sum_u^+$ confirms the difficulty in observing the vibrational levels of the $0_g^-(6s + 6p_{1/2})$ state in the ion spectra, since the probability of forming metastable $a^3 \sum_u^+$ levels is small.

An interesting feature in the Cs$_2^+$ photoassociation spectra for the $0_g^-$ [15] and $1_u$ double-well long-range states is, apart from the intensity minima already discussed in previous works [1], [33], [32], the roughly constant average level of the number of detected molecular ions all over the entire energy range investigated ($\simeq 80 \, \text{cm}^{-1}$ and $\simeq 7 \, \text{cm}^{-1}$, respectively). Assuming comparable ionization efficiency for all produced long-lived ultracold molecules, this indicates that the production rate of ultracold molecules for these particular double-well states in Cs$_2$ is nearly the same for all vibrational levels of the photoassociated molecule. This can be interpreted as due to a balance between the free-bound FC factors driving the photoabsorption probability and the bound-bound FC factors corresponding to the spontaneous emission toward bound levels of the lowest electronic states of the Cs$_2$ molecule; a level close to the dissociation limit of the excited state will be populated efficiently (due to favorable FC factors at large distances), but will only poorly emit toward bound levels of the lowest electronic states (occurring mainly around the Condon point at intermediate distances, where FC factors are smaller). The situation is exactly the opposite for the lowest levels of the excited state. The number of long-lived ultracold molecules computed according to (14) is displayed in Fig. 9, confirming our intuitive analysis: the production of ultracold molecules is a very efficient process in the case of Cs$_2$ double-well states, with an almost constant rate for all levels of the external well.

These calculations yield a theoretical rate of a few molecules per second and per atom, i.e., a global rate for the formation of cold molecules of about $10^7$ molecules per second. This number is in reasonable agreement with the rates obtained directly, from trap-loss measurements. It is also compatible with the values deduced from the measured ion numbers. It finally appears that, to get a rather large rate for cold molecule formation, one needs a good ratio between the PA rate and the bound–bound branching ratio rate for spontaneous emission. For the lowest vibrational levels $v \leq 3$, the very large branching ratio is associated with a very small PA rate so that we predict no formation of cold molecules, which is effectively observed [15]. Concerning the other alkali atoms, only rubidium offers a similar outer well of the $0_g^- (5s + 5p_{3/2})$ state. The number of cold Cs$_2$ molecules is found to be much larger than the number of cold K$_2$ molecules obtained in [17], which is about 1000 molecules per second. It is close to the number, $10^5$ per second, given in the two-step excitation scheme [18].

The calculated distribution over the final vibrational levels is shown in Fig. 10. Only the transitions with the largest FC factors ($> 0.01$) are indicated. This distribution involves a larger range of vibrational levels of the $a^3\Sigma_u^+$ metastable state for the decay of the $0_g^-$ (6s + 6p$_{3/2}$) state. Our results imply that the ultracold molecules are not vibrationally cold, and more elaborate schemes should be invoked [13], [41] to concentrate the population into a single vibrational level, eventually $v = 0$. The possibility of direct formation of cold molecules in a given ro-vibrational level ($v, J$) of the ground or metastable state through stimulated Raman photoassociation is another way for preparation of the $v = 0, J = 0$ level.

## VII. CONCLUSION

To conclude, we have obtained good agreement between the measured PA rates and the values calculated in a weak field PA regime. Taking into account the difficulty of the measurements and the large error bars in estimating the experimental parameters (number of atoms, atomic density), the weak field theoretical approach seems to be quite satisfying. Nevertheless, if the assumptions of the PA theory of (i) weak field regime and (ii) steady-state regime are quite convincing, it is not obvious that the thermal equilibrium condition (iii) is actually satisfied. Even at rather low intensities, PA probably causes the depletion of the population of resonant continuum states. This could be the origin of the observed saturation effects, which are never accompanied by either broadening or shift of the resonances. The quantitative measurements of the rate of formation of cold molecules through photoassociation are performed indirectly, because we never observed any saturation effect in the photoionization process used for the detection. We are, however, confident in the calculated branching ratio for the bound-bound spontaneous emission, which allows us to estimate the number of cold molecules given the number of detected molecular ions. The present rate of formation of cold molecules of 1 molecule per second per atom can still be increased linearly by increasing the atomic density. The formation of cold molecules through photoassociation actually opens an alternative to the laser cooling of cold molecules. As already mentioned, the latter is very difficult, so that internal cooling of molecules has not yet been achieved despite the impressive developments in laser cooling.

For the cesium dimer, the long-range $0_g^-$ and $1_u$ potentials present Condon points at intermediate distances provided by their double-well shape, which is responsible for rather efficient creation of ground and metastable state molecules. For the other alkalis, the $0_g^-$ and $1_u$ outer wells are located at too large distances, $R$, to offer such efficient channels for the formation of cold molecules; the situation could, however, be favorable enough for the formation of cold molecules for rubidium in the case of the $0_g^-$ state. More complex schemes for the formation of cold molecules have to be proposed, with photoassociation of highly excited molecular states [42], [43]. We can also mention a quite different alternative for the production of cold molecules, which is the technique of buffer-gas cooling and loading of molecules into magnetic traps. It has allowed production of CaH molecules in the 400-mK range [44].

PA of cold atoms and the formation of stable cold molecules opens a very promising novel field of investigation. Several difficulties should, however, be resolved. The molecules formed are, indeed, cold both translationally and rotationally [28]; to get them vibrationally cold is an interesting challenge. Moreover, the cold molecular sample is a mixture of different vibrational states. Stimulated Raman photoassociation, where the emission on a given bound-bound transition is stimulated, is probably a good way to obtain all the cold molecules in a well-defined ro-vibrational level. Further Raman transitions will then bring them into the lowest energy level, $v = 0$, $J = 0$ of the considered long-lived molecular state. In order to develop applications of cold molecules, it will be also necessary to store them. Dipolar [45] or magnetic [44] traps should be useful for this purpose. Trapping of cold Cs$_2$ molecules, which are present in a vapor cell MOT, has been demonstrated by using a quasielectrostatic trap, which is formed at the focus of a CO$_2$ laser [45]. This result should be generalized to cold molecules formed through PA. Starting from colder and denser atomic samples, colder and denser molecular clouds will certainly be obtained in the near future and this could be a way toward Bose–Einstein condensation of molecules. Future developments expected in the cold molecule field are similar to those already performed in the cold atom research field: molecule optics, molecule interferometry, nonlinear optics, high-precision spectroscopy, metrology, nanolithography, etc. Laser manipulation of molecules has already reached promising development in molecule optics and molecule interferometry [46], [47]. Application of photoassociation to the formation to more complex species could also open the field of an ultracold photochemistry.

---

**ACKNOWLEDGMENT**

The authors thank F. Masnou-Seeuws, A. Fioretti, B. T'Jampens, and R. Côté for stimulating discussions.




[^1]: The large number of observed rotational levels is due to a cooperative effect between the cooling laser and the PA laser [28]. In fact, if the cooling is switched off during the PA phase, at a temperature, $T \leq 30 \, \mu K$, only the s-wave has to be considered in the experiment with the excitation of only $J = 0$ an $J = 2$ rotational levels, at $T \simeq 200 \, \mu K \, s$-, p-, and d-waves are essentially present and the excitation of rotational state up to $J = 4$ is possible.


