In the previous chapter, we saw that collisions between ultracold atoms can be described in good approximation by a single parameter, the scattering length $a$. Depending on the sign of $a$, the effective interactions can be repulsive ($a > 0$) or attractive ($a < 0$). When they vanish ($a = 0$) the gas behaves as an ideal gas. 

A very important breakthrough occurred in this field when it was realized that $a$ can be changed using a static magnetic field. The physical mechanism responsible for this variation of $a$ is the so-called *Feshbach resonance* that appears when, during a collision process, the two colliding atoms pass through a resonant intermediate state where they are bound. 

There is a certain analogy between this effect and the resonant scattering of a photon by an atom when the frequency $\omega_i$ of the incident photon is close to the frequency $\omega_A$ of an atomic transition connecting the initial state of the atom (which is generally the ground state $g$) to an excited state $e$. 

It is well known[[AiAP-Ch16-References#^Ref1|1]] that the scattering amplitude then exhibits a resonant behavior associated with an energy denominator $\omega_L - \omega_A + i(\Gamma/2)$, where $\Gamma$ is the natural width of the excited state. The Feshbach resonance is similarly associated with an energy denominator $E_{\text{coll}} - E_{\text{bound}} + i(\Gamma_{\text{bound}}/2)$, where $E_{\text{coll}}$ is the energy of the initial state of the two atoms in the collision channel and $E_{\text{bound}}$ and $\Gamma_{\text{bound}}$ are the energy and the width of the intermediate bound state appearing in the collision process.[[AiAP-Ch16-References#^Ref2|2]] 

At very low temperatures, the scattering amplitude is proportional to the scattering length $a$. Since the magnetic moments of the two-atom system are generally not the same in the initial collision state and the intermediate bound state, $E_{\text{coll}} - E_{\text{bound}}$ can be tuned by varying a static magnetic field $B$. As a result, the scattering length $a$ exhibits resonant variations when $B$ is swept around values corresponding to the vanishing of $E_{\text{coll}} - E_{\text{bound}}$.

---

This chapter is devoted to a description of Feshbach resonances and of some of their applications. 

We first introduce the notion of collision channel in the simple case of two colliding alkali atoms (Sec. 16.2). We also describe the microscopic atom-atom interactions that give rise to the potential curves in the various channels as well as the couplings between different channels. The most rigorous way of calculating the scattering lengths is then to solve a set of coupled differential equations derived from the Schrödinger equation called *coupled channel equations*. 

The remaining part of the chapter deals with the simple case in which only two channels are involved: the "open" channel containing the initial collision state and the "closed" channel containing the intermediate resonant bound state. In Sec. 16.3, we develop the analogy with the resonant scattering of a photon by an atom in more detail by using a simple diagrammatic approach. A more precise calculation is then presented in the case of the two-channel model. In Sec. 16.4, we first calculate the scattering states of the two-channel Hamiltonian and we show that the scattering length contains a term varying as $(B - B_0)^{-1}$, where $B_0$ is the resonant value of the magnetic field.[[AiAP-Ch16-References#^Ref3|3]] We analyze the various features of the corresponding Feshbach resonance.

Feshbach resonances are not only useful for manipulating the scattering length and for controlling atom-atom interactions, but also for producing bound states with remarkable properties. When the scattering length is positive, the two-channel Hamiltonian has a bound state whose wave function and binding energy are calculated in Sec. 16.5. 

In particular, we show that in the vicinity of the Feshbach resonance, this bound state has universal properties that depend only on the scattering length and not on the microscopic details of the interaction potential. 

By varying the static field from a region where $a$ is negative to a region where $a$ is positive one can transform a pair of two ultracold colliding atoms into an ultracold molecule. In Sec. 16.6, we briefly review various methods for converting atom pairs into molecules including optical Feshbach resonances and photoassociation.[[AiAP-Ch16-References#^Ref4|4]]