## 16.2.1 Microscopic interactions

Let us consider two alkali atoms, ignoring in a first step the nuclear spin degrees of freedom. Figure 16.1 gives the variations with $r$ of the Born Oppenheimer potentials that give the interaction energy of the two atoms separated by a distance $r$. There are two potential curves depending on the quantum number $S = 1$ (triplet state) or $S = 0$ (singlet state) of the total spin $\vec{S} = \vec{S}_1 + \vec{S}_2$, where $\vec{S}_1$ and $\vec{S}_2$ are the spins of the valence electrons of the two atoms. The antisymmetry of the wave function of the two electrons requires that for $S = 1$ (symmetric spin state) the orbital wave function must be antisymmetric, and vice versa for $S = 0$. It follows that, at short distances, the electrostatic repulsion is not the same in the triplet and in the singlet state. This explains the splitting of the two Born Oppenheimer potentials. At large distance, the splitting between the two curves tends to zero since both potentials are dominated by the attractive van der Waals interaction that varies as $-1/r^6$ where $r$ is the relative distance between the two atoms. Let $P_S$ and $P_T$ be the projection operators onto the singlet and triplet manifolds. The electrostatic interaction between the two atoms can be written as
$$
V_{\text{el}}(r) = V_S(r)P_S + V_T(r)P_T. \tag{16.1}
$$
Using the expressions of $P_S$ and $P_T$ in terms of $\vec{S}_1$ and $\vec{S}_2$, one gets:
$$
V_{\text{el}}(r) = \frac{1}{4}V_S(r) + \frac{3}{4}V_T(r) + \frac{\vec{S}_1 \cdot \vec{S}_2}{2\hbar^2} [V_T(r) - V_S(r)]. \tag{16.2}
$$
This interaction depends only on the distance $r$ between the two atoms and remains invariant under a rotation of the molecular axis. It thus commutes with the relative angular momentum $\vec{L}$ of the two atoms and cannot connect two states with different quantum numbers $\ell$ of this angular momentum.

There are also magnetic interactions $V_{ss}$ between the two atoms that result from the dipole-dipole interactions between the two spin magnetic moments which are much smaller than $V_{\text{el}}$. Contrary to $V_{\text{el}}$, $V_{ss}$ depends on the relative orientation of the molecular axis and the spin direction and can connect two states with different values of $\ell$.

Finally, the total interaction Hamiltonian is equal to
$$
V^{\text{int}} = V_{\text{el}} + V_{ss}. \tag{16.3}
$$

## 16.2.2 Quantum numbers of the initial collision state. Collision channels

We now take into account the nuclear spins $\vec{I}_1$ and $\vec{I}_2$ of the two atoms. The interaction of these nuclear spins with the valence electrons gives rise to two hyperfine states for each atom characterized (in low magnetic fields) by quantum numbers $f_1$ and $f_2$ with magnetic sublevels $m_{f_1}$ and $m_{f_2}$. Consider two atoms in the states $f_1, m_{f_1}$ and $f_2, m_{f_2}$, respectively, undergoing a collision at very low temperature, so that one can consider only the $\ell = 0$ partial wave. The initial collision state of the two ultracold atoms is thus characterized by the set of quantum numbers
$$
\alpha : \{f_1, m_{f_1}, f_2, m_{f_2}, \ell = 0\} \tag{16.4}
$$
summarized by the simplified notation $\alpha$. This set of quantum numbers defines a collision channel, here the *entrance channel*. There are of course other channels defined by other sets $\beta$ of quantum numbers. The diagonal element of $V^{\text{int}}$ in each channel provides a potential energy for each channel. But $V^{\text{int}}$ also has off diagonal elements between different channels that give rise to coupled channel equations.

## 16.2.3 Coupled channel equations

The eigenstates of the total Hamiltonian with eigenvalues $E$ can be written:
$$
|\psi\rangle = \sum_{\alpha} \psi_{\alpha}(\vec{r})|\alpha\rangle \tag{16.5}
$$
where $\psi_{\alpha}(\vec{r})$ is the wave function in channel $\alpha$ whose radial part is of the form
$$
\frac{F_{\alpha}(r, E)}{r}. \tag{16.6}
$$
The coupled equations of motion of the $F_{\alpha}$'s deduced from Schrödinger equation have the following form:
$$
\frac{\partial^2}{\partial r^2}F_{\alpha}(r, E) + \frac{2\mu}{\hbar^2} \sum_{\beta} [E \delta_{\alpha\beta} - V_{\alpha\beta}(r)] F_{\beta}(r, E) = 0, \tag{16.7}
$$
where
$$
V_{\alpha\beta}(r) = \left[ E_{f_1, m_{f_1}} + E_{f_2, m_{f_2}} + \frac{\ell(\ell+1)\hbar^2}{2\mu r^2} \right] \delta_{\alpha\beta} + V^{\text{int}}_{\alpha\beta}(r). \tag{16.8}
$$
Solving these coupled differential equations numerically gives the asymptotic behavior of $F_{\alpha}$ for large $r$, from which one can determine the phase shift $\delta_0$ and, consequently, the scattering length $a$ in the entrance channel.

To get more insight into Feshbach resonances, we now consider a simplified model that takes only two modes into account: that containing the entering collision state and that containing the intermediate resonant bound state.

## 16.2.4 Two-channel model

Figure 16.2 represents the two channels that are kept in the model. The colliding ultracold atoms, with a very small energy $E$, belong to the entrance collision channel, called the *open channel*. The other channel contains the resonant bound state $\varphi_{\text{res}}$ whose energy $E_{\text{res}}$ is very close to $E$. This channel is called *closed* because its dissociation threshold is above $E$, so that the two colliding atoms cannot belong to the continuum of this channel. By sweeping a static magnetic field, the open and the closed channel potentials move with respect to each other so that the difference between $E_{\text{res}}$ and $E$ is varied.

The state of the system can be written as a vector whose components refer to each channel:
$$
\begin{pmatrix} |\varphi_{\text{op}}\rangle \\ |\varphi_{\text{cl}}\rangle \end{pmatrix} \tag{16.9}
$$
where the indices op and cl refer to the spin state in each channel. In this two-state basis, the two-channel Hamiltonian $H_2$ is represented by:
$$
H_2 = \begin{pmatrix} H_{\text{op}} & W \\ W & H_{\text{cl}} \end{pmatrix} \tag{16.10}
$$
where
$$
H_{\text{op}} = T + V_{\text{op}} \text{ and } H_{\text{cl}} = T + V_{\text{cl}} \tag{16.11}
$$
with $T = -\hbar^2 \Delta / (2\mu)$ the kinetic energy operator. In Eq. (16.11), $V_{\text{op}}$ and $V_{\text{cl}}$ are the interaction potentials operators in the open and closed channels, respectively. $W$ describes the coupling between the two channels.

We will also neglect all eigenstates of $H_{\text{cl}}$ other than $\varphi_{\text{res}}$ since near the resonance ($E_{\text{res}} \simeq 0$), they are far from resonance and, compared to $\varphi_{\text{res}}$, their contribution is negligible. In this *single resonance approximation*, we can thus use the following simple expression for the closed channel Hamiltonian:
$$
H_{\text{cl}} = E_{\text{res}} |\varphi_{\text{res}}\rangle \langle \varphi_{\text{res}}|. \tag{16.12}
$$
In Secs. 16.4 and 16.5, we will show that this model is sufficiently simple to allow one to diagonalize the Hamiltonian $H_2$ and to get analytical expressions for the main physical quantities of interest:

*   scattering length,
*   energy and wave function of the bound state of the two-channel Hamiltonian when this bound state exists.

Before doing these calculations, we first present, in the next section, a simple physical interpretation of Feshbach resonances.