Let us first recall the elementary processes involved in the calculation of the resonant light scattering amplitude.[[AiAP-Ch16-References#^Ref5|5]] The first diagram of Fig. 16.3 describes the lowest order scattering process. The impinging photon with wave vector $\vec{k}_i$ and energy $\hbar\omega_i = \hbar c k_i$ is absorbed by the atom which goes from the ground state $g$ to an excited state $e$ located at an energy $\hbar\omega_A$ above $g$. The atom then falls back to $g$ by spontaneously emitting the scattered photon $(\vec{k}_f, \omega_f)$. The energy mismatch in the intermediate state is $\delta E = \hbar(\omega_i - \omega_A)$, so that the corresponding virtual transition lasts a time on the order of $\hbar/|\delta E| = 1/|\omega_i - \omega_A|$, that becomes longer and longer when $\omega_i$ tends to $\omega_A$. The propagator of the intermediate state of the scattering process is proportional to $1/(\omega_i - \omega_A)$. This is the origin of the resonant enhancement of the scattering amplitude. The other Feynman diagrams represent higher order processes where the atom virtually emits and reabsorbs one or more photons before emitting the scattered photon $(\vec{k}_f, \omega_f)$. Summing the amplitudes corresponding to all these processes leads to a *renormalized propagator* for the excited state that is obtained by replacing its energy $\hbar\omega_A$ by $\hbar[\omega_A + \Delta_0 - i(\Gamma_0/2)]$, where $\hbar\Delta_0$ and $\hbar\Gamma_0$ are the energy shift and the energy width of $e$, respectively, due to the coupling of the discrete state $e$ with the continuum of states where the atom is in $g$ in the presence of a photon. The scattering process can also take place with intermediate states $e'$ other than $e$, that are far from resonance when $\omega_i$ is close to $\omega_A$. These give rise to a non-resonant background amplitude that is nearly constant when $\omega_i$ is scanned around $\omega_A$. Finally, this analysis predicts a photon scattering amplitude of the form

$$
A(\vec{k}_i \to \vec{k}_f) = A_{\text{non-resonant}} + A_{\text{resonant}} \tag{16.13}
$$

where

$$
A_{\text{resonant}} \propto \frac{1}{\omega_i - \omega_A - \Delta_0 + i(\Gamma_0/2)}. \tag{16.14}
$$

A similar analysis can be applied to the scattering of two ultracold atoms with an intermediate bound resonant state in a closed channel (see Fig. 16.4). The first diagram at the left of this figure represents a process where the two ultracold atoms in the entrance collision state $\varphi_{\text{coll}}$ combine into the bound state $\varphi_{\text{res}}$ of the closed channel with energy $E_{\text{res}}$ before dissociating into the final collision state. The propagator of this state varies as $1/(E - E_{\text{res}})$ and is very large when $E_{\text{res}}$ is close to $E$. The other diagrams of Fig. 16.4 represent higher order processes where the intermediate bound state virtually dissociates and recombines a certain number of times before undergoing the final dissociation into the final collision state. As in the previous example, one expects that the resonant scattering amplitude varies as:

$$
A_{\text{resonant}} \propto \frac{1}{E - E_{\text{res}} - \hbar\Delta_0 + i\hbar(\Gamma_0/2)} \tag{16.15}
$$

where $\hbar\Delta_0$ and $\hbar\Gamma_0$ are the energy shift and the energy width of the bound state $\varphi_{\text{res}}$, respectively, that result from the coupling of this discrete state in the closed channel to the continuum of collision states in the open channel. The new feature here is that the density of states in the continuum of collision states is very small for the energy $E$ of the initial state because the two colliding atoms are ultracold. It follows that the decay rate $\Gamma_0$ of $\varphi_{\text{res}}$, which according to the Fermi golden rule, is proportional to the density of states of the continuum at an energy equal to $E_{\text{res}}$, is negligible when $E_{\text{res}}$ is close to $E \simeq 0$. One can thus replace $\Gamma_0$ by 0 in Eq. (16.15). Finally, one expects that the scattering length $a$, which is proportional to the scattering amplitude when $E \to 0$, has the form:

$$
a = a_{\text{non-resonant}} + a_{\text{resonant}} \tag{16.16}
$$

where $a_{\text{non resonant}}$ is a background non resonant scattering length corresponding to scattering processes without intermediate association into a bound intermediate state, and where:

$$
a_{\text{resonant}} \propto \frac{1}{B - B_0} \tag{16.17}
$$

where $B_0$ is the value of the static field for which $E_{\text{res}} + \hbar\Delta_0 = E \simeq 0$. Such a prediction is confirmed by the quantitative calculations presented in the next section.